1. Basil reduces oxidative stress
Basil is a powerhouse of antioxidants (free-radical scavengers). These compounds, as the name suggests, combat free radicals found in your body. Studies have elaborated free radicals as notorious elements that cause significant damage to the cells and put you at an increased risk of many health complications, such as heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and arthritis. 

Also, basil has flavonoids, which boost your immune system, slow down the effects of ageing, and protect your cellular structure from damage. 

2. Basil helps in preventing cancer
Although holy basil is quite different from sweet basil (what we use in most of our recipes), it contains phytochemicals. These are bioactive plant compounds that shield you from various cancers, such as skin cancer, lung cancer, oral cancer, and liver cancer.

Basil also slows down the spread and generation of cancerous cells. The American Institute For Cancer Research has conducted several studies to strengthen these claims.

3. Basil benefits digestion
Sweet basil contains eugenol. This chemical compound has anti-inflammatory properties that ensure that your digestive tract is healthy.

Basil benefits your digestive and nervous system while ensuring that you have optimal digestion and a proper pH balance in your body. Basil also relieves constipation by acting as a bulk-forming laxative.

4. Basil offers excellent skin benefits
Basil contains powerful and healing essential oils that cleanse your skin from deep inside. And, if you have oily skin, it is a saviour for you. Camphene, a constituent in basil, helps it act as a toner and thus helps in removing surplus oil, dead cells, and dirt that blocks the follicles. It even works on intractable blackheads and whiteheads.

It also eliminates free radicals that damage the skin making it look old and tired. All you need to do is make a thick paste with a handful of basil leaves, sandalwood powder, and rose water. Apply this pack to your face and neck, wait for 15 to 20 minutes, and wash it with cold water.

If you have an acne problem, the antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory properties of basil and basil oil will also help you prevent it as shown in this study.

5. Basil helps in diabetes management
If you have diabetes, add basil to your diet for sure. It slows down the process of sugar release in the blood while helping you with diabetes management.

According to many studies on animals and humans, holy basil can also help counter the other health complications associated with diabetes, including hyperinsulinemia (high amount of insulin in the blood), excessive body weight, etc.

6. Basil helps fight inflammation in the body
As basil has got potent anti-inflammatory properties and essential oils. It has been empirically proven that oils such as citronellol, linalool, and eugenol help cure a range of health conditions, including inflammatory bowel conditions, heart ailments, and rheumatoid arthritis. Moreover, consuming basil can also help treat headaches, fever, cold and cough, flu, and sore throat. 

7. Basil helps you deal with depression
Basil contains adaptogen, an anti-stress substance. Research shows it helps deal with anxiety and depression while stimulating neurotransmitters that control energy and happiness-inducing hormones. So, sip a hot cup of tea with holy basil and sage brewed to perfection and see the difference.

8. Basil has got detoxifying properties
According to studies, basil safeguards our bodies against toxins by boosting antioxidants and increasing the activity of enzymes That clear off and neutralize free radicals. The free-radical scavenging also helps reduce the ageing of the skin and helps maintain the texture and elasticity of the skin.

Basil is a wonder herb for your liver, one of the most vital organs of your body. It detoxifies your liver and plays a crucial role in preventing fat deposition in your liver. Basil benefits your liver while taking care of your overall health as well. It removes toxins from the blood and purifies it.

9.  Basil helps prevent heart ailments
You already know that basil contains eugenol. Various studies show that this chemical compound aids in blocking the calcium channels, thus lowering your blood pressure.

Also, the essential oils in basil reduce the level of triglycerides and cholesterol in your body. You will also find magnesium in this herb that improves blood circulation and allows your blood vessels and muscles to relax, preventing muscle cramps.

10.  Basil prevents infection
Apart from all the goodness basil possesses, its antibacterial properties are among the most noted ones. It helps fight a range of infections, including skin allergies, urinary infections, and respiratory and abdominal infections. This research reinforces these assertions. 